The 101st
Airborne, 173rd Light Infantry had a battalion
there. All these were organized into a group
called Task Force South. One of the outfits that
was there was Charlie Company 75th Rangers, and
they formed what were called long-range
reconnaissance patrols, six-man teams that
would go out into the jungle, in the valley, in the
mountain areas. and look for the enemy. And by this
time, about six months into my tour, the North
Vietnamese were starting to come into the
province, and they'd go out and try and find them,
and then call in support to kill them. And so my job
was to help put them into the jungle. I'd fly up and
guide the helicopters into various landing
zones, LZs, We'd know in advance where we were
going to let them out. But then we'd have them go
into a couple before and a couple after so the enemy
wouldn't know where we let them out, hopefully. I
flew in support of them while they were out there.
If they got scared or had radio contact, I flew at
night in support of them. We always had an alert
pilot at night. And some of my more interesting
things happened at night. And then we'd help pick
them up. We had some pretty exciting times picking
them up as well. So I had a very mission load, and it
made it really, really interesting. And to use the
word fun sounds inappropriate, but it really was.
It was exciting, and I felt that I did a valuable
job. I felt that I did it very well. And my main
mission was bailing Americans out of trouble. I
will tell you this is one key thing. When you had a
contact, which is what we called countering the
enemy, you had more people wanting to get on the
action than you could handle. When you had an
American in trouble, you had an unbelievable
number of people wanting to help out. Americans
looked out for each other.
Good. Do you feel that there was any, this is kind of
like wading into that again, Do you feel that there
was any racial discrimination and or racial
tension, if so? Not where I was. I know it existed
other places, but not where I was. There was none
where I was. That just didn't matter? It just
didn't happen. The guys who were in the rear areas
had time on their hands, and they're normally the
ones who did most of the drugs and... had the racial
problems that happened in some of the infantry
units too, but usually guys that have to depend on
each other, depended on each other and became very
good friends. Was there any kind of initiation
process? You talked about that there are some
veterans. Did you feel odd at times because you
were the new kid? Not really. The one guy who tried
to act like he was the veteran and the big combat
hero was really sort of a jerk. and I figured him out
pretty fast, so most of the veterans were very
helpful. Did you dislike the local people other
than the enemy that you came in contact with? How
did they feel about you in the United States? We had
Vietnamese observers, and one of our missions was
to fly with the Vietnamese in the back seat. And
these guys were pretty good guys. A couple of them
were local. He lived in Phan Thiet. A couple of them
were what we called Chu Hoys. They're North
Vietnamese who surrendered, or Chu Hoid. Chu Hoi
means I surrender.
And they flew in the back. We got along real well
with them. Over the course of the year, I lost a
great deal of respect for the Vietnamese as a whole
because they'd
been fighting for a lot of years, and they were
tired. But the communists have been fighting for a
lot of years too. And a lot of the South Vietnamese
were giving up, were corrupt, weren't giving
their best effort, would not... Americans would
fly them into an LZ and have to push them out of the
helicopters. I had a South Vietnamese unit fire at
me one time. I had a South Vietnamese Air Force bird
dog pilot fire rockets at American troops. and he
knew they were American troops. And I actually
had, he did that a couple of times and one day we got
orders to, if we could shoot him down to do so. And he
flew off and turned his aircraft over to the enemy
somewhere. He left the area. Did you feel that they
wanted y'all there, but they wanted you to do all
the work? Yeah, some wanted us there and wanted us
to do all the work. Others wanted our money. You
know, what they could make off the GIs selling
things.
I didn't really care about that. I had my job to do. I
didn't really care what the Vietnamese thought.
Do you think that other people did? That they were
angry that they weren't fighting as hard as them?
Oh yeah. Well, I got angry at them too. I really did.
A lot of Americans were disgusted with the
Vietnamese and their You know, there's a lot of
warlike people in the world. South Vietnamese
aren't one of them. North Vietnamese are.
Americans are fairly warlike. That's our
history. We're not the only ones, but we're one of
them. I just don't think the South Vietnamese are.
Some were very, very good, but the majority of them
were just below average. Can you describe... a
pleasant memory that you have or an experience
that you take? Well,
in country,
we had some good parties. We could get lobster tail
for 50 cents. We were so out by ourselves during
that platoon that we had to We'd go to ration
breakdown, and we'd give them rides on our
airplanes and invite them to our parties, and so
they'd give us steaks. We went to Fan Rang, which is
a big Air Force base halfway between Pantheon and
Cameron. A big Air Force base, just like
stateside. Theaters with plush seats and a real
nice officer's club and 10,000-foot runway. We
got two cases of steaks from ration breakdown up
there, and And I flew those two cases and an Air
Force guy back to a party that was waiting for me at
the LZ in our hangar. And I got back and the winds
were 25 knots and 90 degrees to the runway. And the
plane was overloaded and out of balance because I
had one case of stakes in the back behind the guy
sitting in the back seat and one on his lap. And
those are heavy things. Plus we were loaded up with
radios and armored seat and all this other stuff.
And it was a foolish, foolish thing to do, but all
those guys were waiting for me on the ground for the
party to start so they could cook the steaks. And I
had to land, and I thought that was pretty fun. I did
it. I got it in safely. You saved the party. Mm-hmm.
And also, I bailed out some people that were in
trouble, but I'll always treasure that. Mm-hmm.
And the friendships that were. Mm-hmm. Oh, we made
some good friends and lost some good friends.
Mm-hmm. Do you think that would be the most
difficult part, is losing your friends? Yeah.
What do you think, losing your friends? Was being a
pilot, do you feel that that was better or worse
than other types of? Far better, far better. Were
you treated better? Yeah, we were part of the elite
and we didn't get our hands too dirty except when we
were pre-flight in the airplane. After I lived six
months at the LZ, I moved into the hotel downtown.
which was across the street from a school where Ho
Chi Minh taught when he was younger. And so it was
sort of a communist shrine. As a result, we were
never hit while I was there because they were
afraid of damage to the school across the street.
Yeah, I lived well. I had a maid come in every day
when I was at the hotel and wash my uniform and
polish my boots and make my bed and clean the room
and all this kind of stuff. It was not bad at all. Was
there some resentment from the other types of
soldiers? Not really. They liked having me
overhead when they were in trouble. And in fact, I
could go a number of places and not have to buy a
drink because those guys were so glad to see me.
Because they were so dependent on you. Yeah. How
much contact did you have then with the United
States? You said your wife was over there. Well,
she wasn't there. I mean, she was in the States. But
another group of people we invited to our parties
ran the military radio, the Mars system. And they
could call through, like, call ham operators back
in the States. And they had a little device that
they could dial your phone number. And it was like
talking on the radio. And sometimes I'd the
communication would be bad and so the guy on the
other end would have to translate her and I'd tell
her I love you over and she'd say I love you over but I
could call her I usually call her about every other
week I wrote therefore a few letters I wrote a
number of letters but not as many as you might think
I'm a poor letter writer but I got to call her quite a
bit in fact a friend of mine and I were going to go to
Hong Kong on on leave, and the last minute I said to
him, I said, you know, you're a nice guy and all, but
I'd rather see Ann in Hawaii than you in Hong Kong.
So I called her on the phone and told her to fly to Los
Angeles. She was staying with her parents in Fort
Stockton, Texas. I said, fly to Los Angeles, and if
I get out to Hawaii, I'll call you from Guam. And I
called her from Guam, and she got to Hawaii a half
hour after I did. So we went to Hawaii twice, R&R and
leave. That was lucky. Yeah. And did she bring your
son? No, but she brought movies. And I was going to
ask you, what kind of information did she pass on to
you through, I'm talking media and about how the
war was, how people thought of it? We got Stars and
Stripes newspaper, and they were very
intellectually honest. We got the good news and
the bad news. We knew all about the demonstrations
and how bad they were getting. And the news came
heavier and heavier. I was there when Neil
Armstrong walked on the moon for the first time,
and we got that in Stars and Stripes. We didn't have
television where I was, but we did have radio.
Armed Forces, it's AFVN, Armed Forces Radio
Vietnam. And so we were pretty well informed. Did
that make... Y'all angry that there were protests
going
on while you were there? Yeah, very much so. What
was the worst or most difficult thing about being a
pilot? Well, after I got over being scared,
nothing. I mean, I enjoyed it. Like I said, I don't
want to sound tacky, but I was really pretty good at
doing what I did. And I got to the point, there's a
difference between courage and conviction.
Courage is going into a situation that you think
you might get hurt and doing it anyway. Conviction
is where you don't think they can touch you because
you're that much better. Well, there were a couple
of times where I went into situations where I
thought I might get hurt and did it anyway. But most
of the time, I felt they couldn't touch me. that I
could get them before they could get me. And that's
pretty much the way it was. Do you feel like you had
conviction first and then it turned into courage?
I don't know. The courage just happened when it
happened. You didn't expect it or plan for it. I
think... There was one time where a team was
getting picked up, and they were taking fire, and
they were in an exposed position, and they were
taking fire from a tree line, and they were at 5,000
feet, which is the top of this one mountain. And as
heavy as my aircraft was, at that altitude, I
couldn't climb. So I had four rockets, and I made
four level passes at this tree line, and flew
pretty close to it, firing into it. And then after I
was out of rockets, I made two more passes because I
thought maybe they wouldn't know that I was out of
rockets. And it just seemed like the thing to do at
the time. I'll tell you, I was a little antsy, you
know, flying at that tree line that close, giving
them a level shot at me. But the other times I would
fly at night, and I'd have artillery on call, and
I'd turn on all my lights on the aircraft and make it
a target, and then I'd see their flashes when
they'd fire at me, And then I'd call the artillery
on the flashes. Well, that was not courage. That
was conviction because I knew that I believed they
couldn't hit me, that they were bad shots, and that
I could hit them with artillery before they could
hit me with ground fire. So, yeah, there was a
couple of courage things, but mostly it was
conviction. You feel that you're very lucky,
extremely lucky. I am lucky to be here a number of
times over. I've had... One time my son asked me to
catalog all the things that happened to me to
include after Vietnam and other flying. I was a
flight instructor for a while and I flew for the
reserves for a while. I've had over 30 incidents,
16 of which were life-threatening.
I had several crashes and a flare shoot on my wing
and a night in the mountains with no instruments
and no radio aids and in and out of clouds. The flare
shoot I could give you if you had time, I could give
you a chapter and verse of what happened that
night, everything. I remember every detail. The
night in the mountains, we were looking for a lost
IRP team. I can't tell you how I got in. I can tell you
what happened once I was in, but I can't tell you how
I got out. I just don't know. It's a blank. Can you
talk about your group of friends, and do you still
talk to them? I've pretty much lost track of them,
but I'm going to have a 25-year celebration May 6th
of 1995. I had a 20-year celebration, and that's
the day I got back May 6th of 1970. And so in 1990 I had
one, and in 1995 I'm going to have one, and this time
I'm going to try and track some of them down. I kept
in touch with a few of them for a while, about four of
them. But, no, actually, one, two, three, four,
five, kept in touch with six of them. And over the
years, I'm such a poor letter writer. I mean, I
don't even keep in touch with my relatives. So I've
lost track, but you get to this age, and you want to
make those contacts again. So I'm going to track
them down and invite them to the party and figure if
I give them a year's notice, they ought to be able to
make it. But I made some really, really good
friends, and we did some super things together.
One was an Air Force pilot. A couple were guys in my
platoon. One guy named Ed Pennington, and as I
recall and understand that I'm telling you things
best as I remember, he had played football for the
University of Texas. He was a big guy, red-headed
guy. one of the kind of people that everybody
gravitates toward. He was the center of whatever
social group was there. Usually the big men on
campus like that, you might think he'd be a little
stuck up, but he made everybody feel like they were
his close personal friend. He did not
discriminate. He was nice to everybody. And a
month before he was due to leave, He took a sweep
with a, he was an advisor to a South Vietnamese
unit, and he took a sweep for a fellow who was sick,
one of the other Americans who was sick. And he took
a direct hit with a mortar round and was killed. And
there were several tragedies that occurred while
I was there, but I will tell you that the loss of that
individual is as big a loss as I can think of. So Ed
Pennington is somebody I'll always remember.
Do you, I mean, can you kind of remember when you
first got home and when you were coming home, the
attitudes of yourself, your family, friends, and
also other Americans that did not fight? Well, the
first thing that happened was we were, there were a
few of us who were getting short. That's what you
call it when you're due to leave. You go to your date
of return from overseas. It's called DEROS. And
there were Four or five of us sitting around
talking one day, we were all due to leave at about
the same time, and we were saying, boy, it's going
to be good to get back, and I'm looking forward to
getting out of here and go back to the world, and all
those expressions that we used. And I don't
remember who it was, but somebody said, you know,
I'm going to miss it. And we all admitted what we had
been feeling, but nobody had said was that we were
going to miss it. And if I didn't have a wife and
child waiting for me, I would have extended.
Really? And stayed over there. because it was an
intense experience, one I'll not trade for. It was
really incredible. But when we were out
processing, there were guys who were getting
30-day drops. They were getting out of country 30
days early. And helicopter pilots, a lot of the
units, would walk up to a guy when he's preparing
for a flight one day and say, you're not going,
you're not flying anymore.
Anyway, I was supposed to be back in the States on
May 5th, and things were a little intense right
then, and they were short people. And on May 3rd,
I think it was May 3rd, an American was killed in my
province. You know, we didn't have that many
Americans killed. one to a mine, one to a sniper,
one to a mortar round, or a route to a small action or
something like that. But we didn't lose that many.
And so when one was killed, it was a big deal. And we
went after whoever.
And so on May 3rd or 4th, we'd been having a lot of
things going on, and I had delayed going to
out-process. And it was May 4th. was this guy got
killed, and so Bobby Beale, the guy who was my stick
buddy in flight school and has served with me the
whole time there in Fanfiette, which is a real
unusual coincidence. You know, most commissions
officers only flew for six months, then would get a
ground assignment of some kind. And I flew the
whole year with Bobby. And we were going to
out-process together. And... It was just a real
strange confluence that put us in the same
platoon.
But we did this deal where after a while you could
tell if a trail had been used recently because of
the color of the dirt on it. And if you got real low
and dropped all your flaps and flew very slow into
the wind, sometimes you could see clearly enough
which direction they were going. You could tell by
the footprints. And so we would fly on the bushes.
And again, that didn't bother me. I was in control,
so it wasn't courage, it was conviction. But the
other guy would fly up high as sort of a cover in case
anything popped. So we were looking for this guy,
for this group of guys that killed the American,
and didn't find him. But that was, like, the day
before I was supposed to have gone back. And I had
already called Ann and told her I was on my way.
Well, the protests had been pretty hot and heavy
anyway. And the day after I left, our LZ was hit
pretty hard with sappers and the rocket attack.
And somewhere in there was a Cambodian invasion.
So I went to Quignon to out process and went to Nha
Trang for lunch on the way back down and then went to
Cameron and gave him, turned over the airplane and
went out to the out processing center. So I
actually left the day after I was supposed to.
Well, by that time Kent State had happened. And
they said, if you're in uniform, you're liable to
get some pretty rough treatment.
said we could travel out of uniform because they
said, you know, people are getting spit on and
attacked and stuff like that. And nobody in my
group took their uniform off. We all traveled in
uniform. We had our TWs and we got our ribbons, you
know, and I had the wings. And I was pretty proud of
what I'd done. So we flew into Seattle Tacoma
Airport. And there were about three of us. that
went into the restaurant there at Sea Tank. And we
couldn't get served.
We'd try and stop a waitress, and they'd just look
at us and walk on.
So I made the connection to Midland. And at Midland
Airport, Midland Air Terminal, my wife and her
parents were there with my son. And there was one of
those billboards out by the ramp with the stick-on
letters.
By that time, I'd made Captain, and it said,
Welcome Home, Captain Anderson. And the first
thing I did when I saw that sign was look to see who
was going to tear it down. But I was back in Texas,
and things were okay there.
So that's We went out to California to see my
parents, and I was in civilian clothes and went
into a shopping mall. Some hippie said, sign this
petition to stop the baby killing in Vietnam.
I have plenty of clearance to shoot people that I
thought were civilians, and we didn't shoot. And
Ann just sort of led me away.
But homecoming was not good. It was good to see Ann
and the
family, but it was
not what my dad received.
Mm-hmm. No, he deserved everything.
Anyway, what else? Do you feel that drugs were a
problem? Do you feel that? Well, they weren't
where I was. They were at the large depots, and I
heard that later they were in the line units, but
mostly the rear echelon people.
We had some marijuana growing in the wire at Donk 10
where the, not just my company, but other units
were headquartered. And very so often they'd go
burn it out and pretty soon be grown again. The guys
with little to do got bored and a lot of those folks
that did drugs there did drugs in the States. I
mean, it wasn't the war that caused them to
do drugs. I'm a student of history now. Since my
generation, has no idea what your generation went
through with Vietnam.
Do you feel that there are some misconceptions
that my generation has? Some half-truths? Well,
yeah, I think so. The one half-truth is that it's a
little falsehood that's been perpetrated that we
could not have won. We did have it won, and we could
have won had we fought it like a real war. That's
number one. We never fought it like a real war.
Johnson had route packages. He picked targets
that were of no significance from the White House,
contrary to the advice of his Joint Chiefs of
Staff. He had our pilots who flew into the north,
which is some of the toughest flying in history,
That took courage. That was courageous flying.
They had to follow route packages. So the North
Vietnamese with Russian help put up the most
sophisticated air defense the world has ever
known along those route packages, and those guys
had to fly through that. That was criminal. If we'd
fought this like a real war, we could have won that
war, and no one can tell me otherwise. Another
half-truth is that we made a practice of killing
civilians, women and children. Ann Landers had a
column recently in the newspaper where she talked
about, she used the expression, trained to kill
women and babies. Ann Landers used that less than a
month ago in the paper. We weren't trained to kill
civilians. We went out of our way to kill, to not
kill civilians. World War II, they made war on the
civilian population as a matter of policy. In
Vietnam, we sweated and strained not to kill
civilians. There would be people in a prohibited
area, in a free-fire zone that you could shoot
anything that moved. I had clearance to fire and
said, no, these are civilians. We're letting them
go. And that was a judgment call. They may not have
been, but they looked like civilians, and I'd
rather not shoot them. We did a good job. The
people, the American servicemen that I worked
with over there were good troops. They were good at
their jobs. They did it with dedication. They
could have kept their head down for a year and gone
home. But they hung it out to do the job right. They
were good at it. And like I said earlier, if an
American was in trouble, people would do anything
to get that American out of trouble. They would
risk their lives on a regular basis We had a case
where a team of these LURPS were going into an LZ. I
was flying high, directing the helicopter from LZ
to LZ. The one we had picked, we set them down. You
always had to know which one you were going to set
them on because you need to know where they are. And
they need to know where they get off so they can find
their way around. It was a hillside. The
helicopter set down with one skid on the side of the
hill, making sure the rotor blades were The guys
got out of the helicopter. He took off. It happened
to be what is called a hot LZ, or North Vietnamese in
the tree line. They opened fire on this team and the
helicopter. The helicopter took hits, took one
round through the rotor blade, which set up a
vibration. Instead of leaving the area, this guy
did as tight a turn as you can do in a helicopter,
came back in under fire, sat down on the ground, and
sat there until everybody got on board while he was
taking fire and then flew off. Now you can't get
better than that. His name was Cartwright, by the
way. He was a warrant officer. Flew for the 192nd.
He was a real big guy and he had a handlebar mustache
and so we called him
Hoss. The company commander of that unit flew out
one time to get a guy who'd been hit, who was in
triple canopy jungle. The company commander went
out, flew a Huey helicopter down through that
triple canopy, hovering, 300 feet off the ground,
the tops of the trees, hovered down, moved over,
hovered down, moved over, hovered down, until he
got down. He didn't have a penetrator, a jungle
penetrator, so he had to get down there to get the
guy on board. He put him on board and he went back up.
Some of the best flying you can imagine. And the
other thing I'd like to say is those same people are
now some of your most productive citizens, some of
the pillars of the community, some of the best
professionals and business people in our society
today. They are not the malcontents that you see
that go to every parade looking for sympathy,
dressed in this ragtag uniform, saying, oh, woe is
me. Most of those guys either never served in the
military or never served in Vietnam or never
served in a combat unit, my perception is the vast
majority of them are worthless misfits because
the guys that I know who did the